nf-tracer/bracer blog post (#17)
czbiohub/blog: _blog/nextflow-tracer.md

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: TraCeR Pipeline as a Nextflow workflow
date: 2019-09-06
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

## A Brief Introduction to TraCeR
[TraCeR](https://github.com/Teichlab/tracer) is a tool that reconstructs the sequences of rearranged and expressed T cell receptor genes from single-cell RNA-seq data. The TCR sequences are then used to identify cells that have the same receptor sequences and indicate that they are derived from the same original clonally-expanded cell.

> Our TraCeR pipeline is currently ran from command line prompts and on AWS Batch. While this method already efficiently runs the pipeline, there is no straight forward approach to run other of the TraCeR tasks consecutively; Nextflow solves this problem.

Reviewer: I don't think you need to tell the history, instead I'd quickly summarize the steps that make TraCeR attractive to run as part of a workflow

## What is Nextflow?
[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) allows for scalable and reproducible scientific workflows using containers. It simplifies the implementation and deployment of complex, parallel workflows. Because Nextflow is based on the dataflow programming model, you can effortlessly link processes together in one workflow.

> Nextflow also has the capability to run pipelines on AWS Batch without having to deal with the AWS interface.

Reviewer: add reference to AWS batch

## The Implementation
The implementation performs 3 tasks which are linked together through `Channels`. A `Channel` has 2 major properties: sending messages and receiving data. A `Channel` sends messages in an asynchronous manner in which the operation will complete immediately, without having to wait for the receiving process. It will also receive data, which is a blocking operation where the receiving process is stopped until the message has arrived.
 

>  ### Step 1: Open a `Channel` and Preparation

Reviewer: It's hard to understand that Step 1 and Step 2 are part of the same process; I'd rename Step1 just with Preparation or Setup up

Author: in the code step 1 and step 2 are different processes so that's why i separated them, could you elaborate more on what you mean by it being hard to understand that they are part of the same process?

i agree on the step change!

   **`process unzip_reads:`**
<blockquote>
 
   In this first process, we prepare our fastq files for the next steps. We take the fastq files from the `Channel` we opened and unzip them. The unzipped fastq files and their respective sample names are passed into a new `Channel`, ***reads_unzipped_ch***, as output to be used in the following process.

</blockquote>

### Step 2: TraCeR Assembly
  
   In this step, we assemble the reads using TraCeR.

   **`process assemble:`**
<blockquote>
 
   This process takes in the unzipped fastq files from `reads_unzipped_ch` and reconstructs the TCR sequences. The reads are assembled asynchronously and the output is published to a specified `S3 Bucket`. The bucket contains subdirectories for each sample with the output from Bowtie2, Trinity, IgBlast, Kallisto and Salmon as well as files describing the TCR sequences that were assembled.

> 

Reviewer: can the output be written somewhere else? think about the reader perspective, if you'd go try it for the first time after reading the blog post, what do you wish someone would have you told you beforehand? :)

Author: i'm not sure i understand what you mean. the output of the whole assembly or the output from bowtie2, trinity, etc.

   The path to the directory containing all the above information is output into a new `Channel`, ***assembled_ch***, which will be used for the last step.
   
</blockquote>

### Step 3: TraCeR Summarize
  
   Finally, in this last step we summarize the TCR recovery rates as well as generate clonotype networks from the assembled reads.
 
   **`process summarize:`**
 <blockquote>
 
   This last process calls the method [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-collect) on ***assembled_ch***. What this does is it collects all the files emitted from ***assembled_ch*** into a list and uses that as the input for `tracer summarize`. The output contains summary statistics describing successful TCR reconstruction rates as well information on the cells and which clonal groups they belong to. The output is published to the same S3 bucket.

>    

Reviewer: then I'd add step 4: visualization because who doesn't like a pretty picture to put in the paper?

Author: for visualization, would i include visualizations from the one you shared with me a while back?

Reviewer 2: It can be outside the pipeline (and you can say that explicitly, like "After we run the pipeline we can visualize the results...etc") but I agree it would be nice to have an ending figure or result here, just to demonstrate the kind of data you get in the end (doesn't have to be novel biology or anything).

Also, a conclusion or summary paragraph would be good. In particular, if you could contrast the benefits of Nextflow over what we had before (or other options you considered), that would be useful for demonstrating the value of this workflow.

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: TraCeR Pipeline as a Nextflow workflow
date: 2019-09-06
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

> 

Reviewer 2: This post needs an introduction. What is your project? Why are you doing it? What data are you using? And how does that lead into the rest of this post?

> ## TraCeR and its Modes

Reviewer 2: Yeah an introduction to Tracer is necessary. If I click the link I probably don't come back to read the rest of this.

> [TraCeR](https://github.com/Teichlab/tracer) has 3 modes, but of the 3 modes we use only 2: *assemble* and *summarize*

Reviewer 2: (minor style note) I would spell out "three" and "two" here for readability.

> 1. ***Assemble*** takes fastq files of paired-end RNA-seq reads from single-cells and reconstructs TCR sequences and for each cell, an output directory is created that contains subdirectories with output from Bowtie2, Trinity, IgBlast, Kallisto and Salmon as well as files describing the TCR sequences that were assembled.

Reviewer 2: (MSR) "single-cells" -> "single cells".

New sentence after "reconstructs TCR sequences."

> 2. ***Summarize*** takes a directory output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells and summarizes the TCR recovery rates as well as generate clonotype networks from the assembled reads.

Reviewer 2: This could also be two (or more) sentences. Lot of ideas in one breath

We run the above modes on our mice single-cell data to identify cells that have the same receptor sequences. This can indicate that the cells are derived from the same original clonally-expanded cell.

> Our TraCeR pipeline is currently ran from command line prompts and on AWS Batch. While this method already efficiently runs the pipeline, there is no straight forward approach to run other of the TraCeR tasks consecutively; Nextflow solves this problem.

Reviewer 2: Grammar issues

Reviewer 2: Actually I'm not sure what this paragraph is saying–what is Nextflow making possible here?

## What is Nextflow?

> [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) allows for scalable and reproducible scientific workflows using containers. It simplifies the implementation and deployment of complex, parallel workflows. Because Nextflow is based on the dataflow programming model, you can effortlessly link processes together in one workflow.

Reviewer 2: You should rewrite this even more to match your own style–it still feels like it came straight from their website. It was a little jarring to read this after the previous section.

Nextflow also has the capability to run pipelines on [AWS Batch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/batch/latest/userguide/what-is-batch.html) without having to deal with the AWS interface.

## The Implementation
The implementation performs 3 tasks which are linked together through `Channels`. A `Channel` has 2 major properties: sending messages and receiving data. A `Channel` sends messages in an asynchronous manner in which the operation will complete immediately, without having to wait for the receiving process. It will also receive data, which is a blocking operation where the receiving process is stopped until the message has arrived.
<p align="center">

> <img src="/images/nextflow-tracer/workflow.png" alt="nextflow workflow" width="70%" height="70%">

Reviewer 2: Nice figure 👍 Does nextflow auto-generate this or did you make it?

Author: I made it, thanks!

</p> 

>  ### Step 1: Preparation

Reviewer 2: Not formatting correctly, need to delete the space I think

  
   The first step is to create a `Channel` using the method [`.fromFilePairs()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs). This method returns the file pairs matching the [glob](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob) pattern input by the user. In our case, the file pairs returned are the sample names and their fastq files of paired-end RNA-seq reads from single-cell. These file pairs are then used as input for the first process.

   **`process unzip_reads:`**
<blockquote>
 

>    In this first process, we prepare our fastq files for the next steps. We take the fastq files from the `Channel` we opened and unzip them. The unzipped fastq files and their respective sample names are passed into a new `Channel`, ***reads_unzipped_ch***, as output to be used in the following process.

Reviewer 2: Indenting seems to mess up formatting also, you don't need to do it.

   The path to the directory containing all the above information is output into a new `Channel`, ***assembled_ch***, which will be used for the last step.
   
</blockquote>

### Step 3: TraCeR Summarize
  
   Finally, in this last step we summarize the TCR recovery rates as well as generate clonotype networks from the assembled reads.
 
   **`process summarize:`**
 <blockquote>
 
   This last process calls the method [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-collect) on ***assembled_ch***. What this does is it collects all the files emitted from ***assembled_ch*** into a list and uses that as the input for `tracer summarize`. The output contains summary statistics describing successful TCR reconstruction rates as well information on the cells and which clonal groups they belong to. The output is published to the same S3 bucket.
   
</blockquote>

> <img src="/images/nextflow-tracer/nextflow_logo.png" alt="nextflow logo" width="30%" height="30%"><img src="/images/nextflow-tracer/aws_batch.png" alt="aws batch" width="40%" height="40%">

Reviewer 2: Feels a bit weird to plop these at the end with no explanation. They could be mixed into the text (when you mention them) or you could add something here about how these services were useful.

---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: TraCeR & BraCeR
date: 2019-10-12
author: Clarissa Vazquez-Ramos
---

We are interested in how the immune system changes with age, and we accomplish that by building a clonal landscape of T and B cells to illustrate the diversity of the immune repertoire.

## What are T and B Cells?
<img align="right" src="/images/tracer-bracer/bcell.png" width="25%" height="25%">

> T and B cells are lymphocytes (white blood cells) and active participants of the immune system. They both undergo V(D)J recombination--a process in which their DNA is shuffled--in order to develop receptors to potentially recognize foreign entities in the body, such as viruses. A receptor lies on the surface of the cell and expresses unique biological code that recognizes a specific antigen. You can think of it like a puzzle, where only one side of a puzzle piece is designed to fit with another. The difference between a T cells and a B cells therein lies in how they interact with a virus, an antigen presenting cell.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence here looks to be mid-rewrite. Either "the difference between T cells..." or "the difference between a T cell..."

The ending is also confusing. "a virus _or_ an antigen presenting cell", maybe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
T and B cells are lymphocytes (white blood cells) and active participants of the immune system. They both undergo V(D)J recombination--a process in which their DNA is shuffled--in order to develop receptors to potentially recognize foreign entities in the body, such as viruses. A receptor lies on the surface of the cell and expresses unique biological code that recognizes a specific antigen. You can think of it like a puzzle, where only one side of a puzzle piece is designed to fit with another. The difference between T cells and B cells lies in how they interact with external threats and antigen-presenting cells.
```

A T cell will attack and kill an antigen presenting cell directly. A B cell will secrete antibodies, leading it to turn into a plasma cell, and eventually lysing and releasing antibodies into the bloodstream.

<p align="center">

> <img src="/images/tracer-bracer/tcell-bcell.png" alt="tcell vs bcell" width="40%" height="40%">

Reviewer 2: Like the image but could use a label for which one is T and which is B

Author: thanks! will update

</p>

When T and B cells encounter antigen presenting cells, they undergo clonal expansion. Clonal expansion is a process in which T and B cells will multiply in order to fight off antigen presenting cells. We are able explore clonal expansion on our cells by using the tools TraCeR & BraCeR.

## TraCeR & BraCeR Core Functions
<img align="right" src="/images/tracer-bracer/tracer-bracer-fn.png" alt="tracer-bracer core functions" width="28%" height="28%">

> TraCeR and BraCeR were developed specifically to handle single cell data. It's main purpose is to reconstruct the sequences of TCR and BCR genes and identify cells that have the same receptor sequence. The 2 modes that perform this are *assemble* and *summarize*

Reviewer 2: "It's main purpose" -> "Their main purpose" (referring to TraCer and BraCer together).

Reviewer 2: And I'd write out "two" in the last sentence ("The two modes") for readability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TraCeR and BraCeR were developed specifically to handle single cell data. Their main purpose is to reconstruct the sequences of TCR and BCR genes and identify cells that have the same receptor sequence. The two modes that perform this are *assemble* and *summarize*
```

1. ***Assemble*** is almost identical in both TraCeR and BraCeR. They both take paired-end scRNA-seq reads and reconstruct their TCR/BCR sequences. The reconstructed sequences are used to identify cells that have the same receptor sequence. Reconstruction is accomplished with the following steps: alignment, de novo assembly, IgBlast, and TCR/BCR expression quantification. BraCeR takes an extra step to perform a BLAST search before IgBlast.
For each cell, an output directory is created with output from Bowtie2, Trinity, (BLAST), IgBlast, and Salmon as well as files describing the TCR sequences that were assembled.

> 2. ***Summarize*** takes a directory output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells and summarizes the TCR recovery rates as well as generate clonotype networks from the assembled reads. This step helps us identify cells that have undergone clonal expansion.

Reviewer 2: A little confusing due to noun (dis)agreement. This step takes multiple directories from the assemble phase, and summarizes them?

Probably should read "takes the directories output from..."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. ***Summarize*** takes the directories output from the ***assemble*** phase of several cells, summarizes the TCR recovery rates, and generates clonotype networks from the assembled reads. This step helps us identify cells that have undergone clonal expansion.
```

Currently, we run TraCeR and BraCeR on AWS Batch by manually submitting the jobs. We submit thousands of cells to be assembled asynchronously, then we pull the assembled cells down and summarize them to identify clonal groups. While this method already accomplishes our goal, we wanted to find a way to improve the reproducibility of the pipeline. Thus, we found Nextflow.

## What is Nextflow?

> [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) is a workflow manager which allows for scalable and reproducible scientific workflows using containers. It simplifies the implementation and deployment of complex, parallel workflows, which is necessary for the thousands of single cell data we process. Because Nextflow is based on the dataflow programming model, you can effortlessly link processes together in one workflow.

Reviewer 2: I think remove "data" and just say "thousands of single cells we process."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) is a workflow manager which allows for scalable and reproducible scientific workflows using containers. It simplifies the implementation and deployment of complex, parallel workflows, which is necessary for the thousands of single cells we process. Because Nextflow is based on the dataflow programming model, you can effortlessly link processes together in one workflow.
```

<p align="center">
<img src="/images/tracer-bracer/nf-workflow.png" alt="nextflow workflow" width="70%" height="70%">
</p>

### Step 1: Preparation
The first step is to open a `Channel` using the method [`.fromFilePairs()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html#fromfilepairs). This method returns the file pairs matching the [glob](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob) pattern input by the user. In our case, the file pairs returned are the sample names and the fastq files. These file pairs are then used as input for the first process.

**`process unzip_reads:`**

> <blockquote>

Reviewer 2: Using a blockquote html tag breaks markdown formatting. If you really want it, use a `>` character at the beginning of the line, instead (e.g. `> In this first process...`)

But: using a blockquote makes it looks like this is a quote. I don't think you need any formatting here, but if you want to indent these paragraphs maybe use a single bullet point (` * In this first process...`)

**`process assemble:`**
<blockquote>
 
This process takes in the unzipped fastq files from `reads_unzipped_ch` and reconstructs the TCR/BCR sequences. The reads are assembled asynchronously and the output is published to a specified directory. The directory is then output into a new `Channel`, ***assembled_ch***, which will be used for the last step.
 
</blockquote>

### Step 3: TraCeR/BraCeR Summarize
Finally, in this last step we summarize the TCR/BCR recovery rates as well as generate clonotype networks from the assembled reads.

**`process summarize:`**
 <blockquote>

This last process calls the method [`.collect()`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operator-collect) on ***assembled_ch***. What this does is collects all the files emitted from ***assembled_ch*** into a list and uses that as the input for `tracer/bracer summarize`. The output contains summary statistics describing successful TCR/BCR reconstruction rates as well information on the cells and which clonal groups they belong to. The output is published to the same directory where the assembled files are.

</blockquote>

![nf-tracer run](/images/tracer-bracer/nf-tracer.gif)

### Step 4: Visualization

> Different visualizations you could create with output from TraCeR/BraCeR are clonal trees, clonal networks, pie charts, etc. A clonal network can help us landscape a cell population's clonal groups. For example, in the figures below we visualize the landscape of our MACA data by observing the number of clones for 2 age groups: 3 months and 24 months. This network shows us that number of clones have increased with age. If we look at the distribution of clonal cells vs. singletons (non-clonal cells) through a pie chart instead, we see that the ratios of singletons to clonal cells have changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Different visualizations you could create with output from TraCeR/BraCeR are clonal trees, clonal networks, pie charts, etc. A clonal network can help us visualize the landscape a cell population's clonal groups. For example, in the figures below we visualize the landscape of our MACA data by observing the number of clones for two age groups: 3 months and 24 months. This network shows us that the number of clones has increased with age. If we look at the distribution of clonal cells vs. singletons (non-clonal cells) through a pie chart instead, we see that the ratios of singletons to clonal cells have changed.
```
